 Commercial exploitation over the past two hundred years drove the great Mysticete whales to near extinction.  Variation in the sizes of populations prior to exploitation, minimal population size during exploitation and current population sizes permit analyses of the effects of differing levels of exploitation on species with different biogeographical distributions and life-history characteristics.  Dr. Stephen Palumbi at the University of Hawaii will study the genetic population structure of three whale species in this context, the Humpback Whale, the Gray Whale and the Bowhead Whale.  The effect of demographic history will be determined by comparing the genetic structure of the three species.  Additional studies will be carried out on the Humpback Whale.  The humpback has a world-wide distribution, but the Atlantic and Pacific populations of the northern hemisphere appear to be discrete populations, as is the population of the southern hemispheric oceans.  Each of these oceanic populations may be further subdivided into smaller isolates, each with its own migratory pattern and somewhat distinct gene pool.  This study will provide information on the level of genetic isolation among populations and the levels of gene flow and genealogical relationships among populations.  This detailed genetic information will facilitate international policy decisions regarding the conservation and management of these magnificent mammals. 
 Studies of chickens have provided serological and nucleic acid probes useful in defining the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) in other avian species.  Methods used in detecting genetic diversity at loci within the MHC of chickens and mammals will be applied to determining the extent of MHC polymorphism within small populations of ring-necked pheasants, wild turkeys, cranes, Andean condors and other species.  The knowledge and expertise gained from working with the MHC of the chicken should make for rapid progress in defining the polymorphism of the MHC in these species and in detecting the polymorphism of MHC gene pool within small wild and captive populations of these birds.  Genes within the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) are known to encode molecules that provide the context for recognition of foreign antigens by the immune system.  Whether a given animal is able to mount an immune response to the challenge of a pathogen is determined, in part, by the allelic makeup of its MHC.  In many species, an unusually high degree of polymorphism is maintained at multiple loci within the MHC in freely breeding populations.  The allelic pool within a population presumably provides diversity upon which to draw in the face of environmental challenge.  The objective of the proposed research is to extend ongoing studies of the MHC of domesticated fowl to include avian species experiencing severe reduction in population size.  Knowledge of the MHC gene pool within populations and of the haplotypes of individual animals may be useful in the husbandry of species requiring intervention for their preservation. 
This research is part of an on-going program by the principal investigator and associates.  Topics in the following areas are to be considered:  (1)  controlled Markov diffusions and nonlinear PDEs; (2) asymptotic properties of nearly deterministic Markov processes; (3) financial economics applications; (4) singular stochastic control; (5) computational methods in stochastic control; (6) stochastic calculus of variations; (7) nonlinear estimation.  Analytical methods based on viscosity solution techniques for nonlinear differential equations as well as probabilistic methods will be studied. These theoretical studies are the basis for applied problems ranging from decisions at the stock market level to the control of spaceships. 
This SBIR proposal is aimed at (1) the synthesis of new ferroelectric liquid crystals with ultra-high polarization, chemical stability and low viscosity, and (2) suitable modifications that yield functional materials with broad operational temperature ranges and fast electro-optic response times for use as components in commercial ferroelectric liquid crystals devices that are direct-drive or voltage limited. 
 Dr. Chisholm will investigate fundamental aspects of growth regulation and dynamics of marine plankton in the fluctuating environments that are typical of oceanic regimes. This understanding is essential for modelling and designing studies of marine productivity and food web dynamics. Specifically, they will:  *    Study the diatom life cycle, to better understand what environmental and genetic factors control the switch from vegetative to sexual reproduction;  *    Investigate the cell cycle in cyanobacteria and marine bacteria, to better understand how their DNA cycle is regulated under changing growth conditions, and why aspects of the cycle deviate from the classic E. coli model;  *    Develop a multichannel, high-sensitivity (and relatively inexpensive) flow cytometer, which will facilitate the study small picoplankton and marine bacteria.  The results of this work will augment our understanding of microbial growth rates in the sea and phytoplankton population genetics; it should also contribute methodological advances for the study of marine bacteria at sea.  Moreover, it could enhance our fundamental understanding of microbial physiology by revealing features of marine organisms which deviate from classical paradigms. 
This research will study the complexity of computation using the framework of Boolean circuit complexity.  Special emphasis is placed on the following topics:  Strong separations of circuit classes: If known separations of small circuit complexity classes could be strengthened, it would imply separations on larger time- and space-complexity classes.  This connection will be investigated, using the notion of "immunity" as a tool.  Width-bounded reducibility: This notion will be used as a tool to investigate the relationships among "similar" complexity classes.  This project also investigates threshold circuits, an structure of the complexity class P/poly. 
 Duke University will operate the R/V CAPE HATTERAS during 1990 as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded research projects.  The R/V POINT SUR is a 135' general research vessel constructed in 1981 and owned by the National Science Foundation. Duke operates the CAPE HATTERAS under a charter agreement with NSF.  The ship operates primarily off the U.S. east coast from Maine to Florida.  This vessel is part of a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects.  Most oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members.  An increasing number of research projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship must be specifically designed.  Such equipment also requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation.  These vessels do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research.  These vessels are operated by universities and research institutions around the country. 
 The Scripps Institute of Oceanography will operate four research vessels: R/V MELVILLE, a 245' general oceanographic vessel constructed by the Navy in 1969; R/V THOMAS WASHINGTON, a 208' research vessel constructed by the Navy in 1965; R/V NEW HORIZON, a 170' research vessel constructed by the University of California in 1978; and R/V ROBERT GORDON SPROUL, a 125' vessel built in 1981 and subsequently converted for research purposes.  These vessels are part of a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects.  Most oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members.  An increasing number of research projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship must be specifically designed.  Such equipment also requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation.  These vessels do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research.  These vessels are operated by universities and research institutions around the country.  The R/V's T.WASHINGTON and MELVILLE operate worldwide, while the R/V NEW HORIZON operates primarily in the northeastern Pacific. The R/V SPROUL operates primarily in the coastal waters of California. 
 Bermuda Biological Station will operate the R/V WEATHERBIRD II during 1990 as a general oceanographic vessel in support of NSF-funded research projects.  The R/V WEATHERBIRD II is a 115' general research vessel that was originally converted in 1989 and is owned by the Bermuda Biological Station.  Additional conversion work on the vessel will be conducted in phases during 1990 and 1991.  The ship operates primarily in the vicinity of Bermuda.  This vessel is part of a fleet used by the National Science Foundation to support oceanographic research projects.  Most oceanographic research projects require highly specialized equipment and extensive support from a ship's crew members.  An increasing number of research projects require equipment that must be permanently installed on a ship and for which the ship must be specifically designed.  Such equipment also requires highly trained crew members for maintenance and operation.  These vessels do not operate in the same manner as general cargo or fishing vessels, and therefore, NSF supports the operation of a variety of vessels specifically dedicated to oceanographic research.  These vessels are operated by universities and research institutions around the country. 
This proposal seeks to demonstrate a technique for observing ocean currents by electric field measurements using a towed instrument of recent design.  The measurements will be made in conjunction with a cruise across the Gulf Stream in which several additional observational techniques will be employed.  The several data types will be intercompared to improve the accuracy of the methods. 
The motion of energetic particles in the geospace environment depends sensitivety upon solarwind changes.  This grant is to assess the long-term solar cycle affects on the characteristics  of energetic particles in the near-earth space and the contributions from the escape of magnetospheric particles to upstream ion events near the Earth's bow shock.  It is also planned to investigate energetic particle processes during substorms through participation of CDAW-9 and by comparison between substorm intensifications and particle bursts.  An additional project will be to examine the stability of the neutral sheet in the so-called current disruption region in the magnetotail.  *** // 
The mathematical theories of multivariate polynomial interpolation and multivariate spline approximation differ in content and goals, yet share a common source.  In addition, many of the mathematical tools used to analyze basic questions are similar.  Underlying much of this work has been the problem of developing a strategy for developing a theory of splines in several dimensions which is both computationally effective and as accurate as the one dimensional basis from which the subject arose. Work on multivariate polynomial interpolation derives from problems in what became known as box spline theory.  A surprisingly simple and general method for choosing, for any given finite set of points in a space of several variables, a good polynomial space for interpolation at those points, has been discovered.  Work will now be done exploring the theoretical and practical ramifications of this discovery.  A long-term objective is to construct a coherent theory of interpolation, one which will play a more important role in multivariate numerical analysis. There are many approaches to spline approximation in higher dimensions currently in use.  Each is associated with a certain type of mesh along which the elements are joined.  The focus of this work will be that of approximation order.  A better understanding of what makes for a good approximation order is expected to lead to the construction of better approximation methods. Ultimately, one would like to develop a unification of the various theories and techniques now extant. A particularly important area of application of this work is in providing mathematical models of surfaces, often from a given set of bounding curves.  The mainstay of industrial work at this time is a method which only works for relatively flat surfaces. One immediate goal is to obtain a better understanding of how one can tell whether a given surface can be well represented by a small number of patches. 
Work to be done during the period of this award will focus on higher dimensional inverse scattering problems and on related one dimensional problems.  The underlying idea for work of this nature is that of constructing obstacles from data measured as particles pass the obstacle.  The transition from the future of a solution of, say, the wave equation, to the past is called the scattering transform.  Knowledge of either the transform or its spectrum is considered to be central to understanding any wave or generalized wave which experiences scattering. This work will consider extending results on time dependent Schrodinger equations with slowly decaying potentials in which the inverse equation admits simple poles.  In higher dimensional settings the advent of multiple poles cannot be ruled  out. However, their structure is not understood.  The question  of whether or not they may accumulate will also be studied. One method to be used will consider solutions for time dependent Schrodinger equations which are not necessarily bounded in time.  This method has been used to achieve the complete solution (for all potentials) for the one dimensional nxn inverse scattering problem as well as for the one dimensional n-th order scalar equation.  Several classical equations and systems are expected to be analyzed using results developed through this investigation.  They include the Zakharov-Shabat system and the KPI equation. 
This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Patrick S. Mariano, Department of Chemistry, University of Maryland, to pursue with Dr. Ung Chan Yoon, Department of Chemistry, Pusan National University, for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research on electron transfer-induced photochemical reactions of organic systems.  Specifically, sequential electron transfer-electrofugal group elimination sequences, promoted by excitation of reacting substrates or electron transfer photosensitizers, will be employed as general methods for generation of heteroatom substituted carbon radicals.  The mechanistic details and synthetic applications of these processes will be probed.  This project is a continuation of the cooperative research of the two investigators supported under NSF Grant No. INT-8717920, and adds an international cooperative dimension to Dr. Mariano's current research under NSF Grant No. CHE-8917725.  Their previous collaborative research has been highly successful and has resulted in several joint publications in refereed journals.  This successful collaboration has generated ideas which serve as the basis for continuing joint research.  The studies planned for the period of continued collaboration should provide knowledge about various aspects of the new area of electron transfer photochemistry (photoelectrochemistry) and about new and potentially efficient methods for construction of complex molecular structures.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. 
This Science in Developing Countries award will help to support a research collaboration between Professor James Erskine of the University of Texas at Austin and Professor Jose Araya-Pochet of the University of Costa Rica.  The researchers intend to explore the relationship between atomic level structure and magnetism, and to probe fundamental concepts in phase transitions.  The project will investigate electronic and magnetic properties of matter that are intrinsic to thin film structures, surfaces, and interfaces. The experimental approach will combine novel materials synthesis, advanced structure determination methods, and spin sensitive spectroscopic techniques.  The proposed work is driven by new capabilities to deliberately modify and characterize physical properties of matter that affect magnetic behavior, and by recent improvements in magnetically sensitive spectroscopic techniques.  These experienced collaborators will use the latest instrumentation at the University of Texas and at the National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory to pursue the goals of the project. 
In this project, the P.I. will use model and data assimilation techniques to study seasonal and interannual variability in freshwater transport, the relationship between near-surface temperature and salinity, and offshore transport of mass and heat in the western tropical Atlantic Ocean. 
 The effects of deforestation on the extinction rates of plant species in tropical rain forests are well documented.  Less is known about the impact of deforestation on the loss of genetic variation within tree species because there is not enough information about the amount and patterns of spatial distribution of genetic variation in natural populations.  Genetic variation is considered to be important in the long term survival of populations.  Thus, information about the amount and patterns of genetic variation within and among populations is central to the design of appropriate measures to conserve tropical tree populations.  Equally important is to understand the genetic factors, such as mating systems and the level of gene exchange among populations, which greatly influence the distribution of genetic variation.  Many tree species in tropical rain forests have low population density.  Small populations may lose genetic variation, and may also be subject to inbreeding depression (deleterious effects in reproductive output due to mating among close relatives).  Thus, it is paricularly important to study factors regulating genetic variation in species that typically occur in low densities.  The objectives of this research are to 1.  analyze the amount and patterns of genetic variation, 2.  estimate effective population size, 3.  measure the rate of outcrossing (or inbreeding), 4. determine the level of gene exchange among populations, and 5. examine the effects of density on the level of inbreeding and reproductive output in natural populations of tropical lowland rain forest trees.  The field work will be conducted at the La Selva Biological Field Station of the Organization for Tropical Studies in Costa Rica, and the laboratory work at the University of Massachusetts at Boston. 
 In collaboration with Costa Rican graduate students and scientists at two universities in Costa Rica, Dr. Owens will carry out a two-year field study of the behavioral factors influencing the migrations and unique nesting patterns of the olive ridley sea turtle.  The olive ridley and the closely related Kemp's ridley have a distinctive nesting behavior in which thousands of turtles gather in nearshore waters at the nesting beach and then emerge en masse to lay their eggs.  This mass nesting is commonly known by the Spanish word "arribada," but the physiological mechanisms and environmental cues involved are unknown.  The olive ridley is a commercially important species threatened with extinction because it is under extreme exploitation pressure from fisheries between Mexico and Equador. Because of the lack of data on the at-sea behavior and movements of the olive ridley, any information collected will contribute significantly to our understanding of this animal.  The objectives of this study are to (1) monitor the pre-nesting and post-nesting at-sea movements and diving characteristics of the olive ridley and (2) determine the behavioral components involved in arribada mating and massing.  These data will then be combined with information on the physiology of the same turtles, being obtained under grant BNS 88-19940.  Dr. Owens and his colleagues will attach satellite-tracking transmitters to female and male olive ridleys to follow their movements.  Both behavior in the vicinity of the nesting beach and long-term migrations away from the nesting beach to the feeding grounds will be studied. Monitoring these movements will allow the researchers to evaluate feeding, courtship, mating, and massing behaviors prior to and following arribada events.  An improved understanding of the factors regulating the mass nesting and migratory behaviors has basic importance in marine zoology and potential value in developing improved methods for conserving this commercially exploited species. 
 Our ability to restore tropical ecosystems and to construct sustainable, useful analogs of tropical forests depends on our ability to grow communities of plants that are ecologically compatible.  This research will evaluate mixtures of species likely to use space and soil resources in complementary ways, enabling them to take good advantage of the high potential productivity of the humid tropics while protecting the soil. Plants of three life forms (those that are self.supporting and have broad, horizontally displayed leaves; those that are self . J H.supporting, with narrow, erect or arching leaves; and vines) and three life spans (several months to many decades) will be grown in combinations of one, two, or three species at the La Selva Biological Station in Costa Rica.  The performance of the gardens will be evaluated by measuring growth, light capture, water use, and nutrient retention.  The efficiency with which simple and complex communities use resources is likely to improve dramatically during the first two years of growth, and longer.lived plants are likely to excel as community age increases.  Because invasions by unwanted species are so important to the maintenance of native biodiversity, each artificial community will be tested for resistance to invasion by native and exotic plants. 
Optimizing the chances of survival of rare or endangered plants is a fundamental concern of plant conservation biologists. Part of this effort involves assessing the current "health" of populations and predicting chances of their long-term survival. This work will compare two methods of assessing population "health" and the likelihood of long-term survival for the royal catch-fly (Silene regia), a prairie relict.  The investigators will determine levels of genetic variation in populations of various size, isolation, and management using biochemical techniques.  It is generally held that populations high in genetic variation are better buffered against environmental perturbations in the short-term and that genetic variation provides a pool of resources that can be drawn from for long-term adaption and evolutionary change.  However, the importance of genetic variation to the persistence of plant populations has rarely been demonstrated with field studies. The investigators will compare data from genetic studies with demographic data of actual survival, seed production, and seedling establishment of plants in the same sites.  Computer modeling will be used to project, based on actual values recorded over the relatively short term of the study, into the future to estimate which populations are most likely to persist. 
 The continued destruction of the coastal and tropical forest in South and Central America threatens the survival of natural animal populations, including the callitrichid primates (tamarins and marmosets).  While the golden lion tamarins are considered an endangered species, through a highly successful breeding program at the University of Nebraska under the auspices of the National Zoological Park, these primates are being bred in captivity and a small group of six have recently been reintroduced into forests of Brazil.  Their survival as a species, however, depends extensively on understanding how their reproduction is synchronized to lead to a greater likelihood of fertilization.  Dr. French will investigate the complex interplay between internal physiological factors and external social and environmental factors in gold lion tamarins.  Unlike Old World primates and apes, the callitrichid primates are monogamous and thus, develop a close and long-lasting association, or pair- bond, between a breeding male and female.  Dr. French will use noninvasive data collection techniques for both hormone samples and behavioral measurements to compare the degree to which social factors influence hormonal regulation of reproduction.  His findings will be compared with the results obtained in similarly conducted studies in which Old World non-monogamous primate species have been used.  This work will contribute to our understanding of the role of hormonal and social influences on reproductive behavior in golden lion tamarins as well as other New World primates of which many are considered threatened or endangered species.  Furthermore, the results will significantly enhance the captive breeding programs of endangered species and thus, contribute to the preservation of these small South American primates. 
